Student Organizations | NC State ISE
Skip to content
Student Organizations
Alpha Pi Mu (APM)
American Production and Inventory Control Society (APICS)
Industrial and Systems Engineering Graduate Student Association (ISE GSA)
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE)
SME
Society for Health Systems (SHS)
Other Engineering Student Organizations
Alpha Pi Mu (APM)
APM is one of the most recognized societies in the field of industrial engineering. It identifies its members as being the top of their class.
APM at NC State promotes the field of industrial engineering through:
Monthly meetings
Guest speakers
Information sessions
Community service
Social activities
Moreover, we invite you to interact with your peers and form relationships that last beyond college. Potential employers see us as leaders which let us bring our high level of academic achievement to the workforce. So it’s no surprise that we have succeeded in the industry. Just ask Nur Ozaltin, is a Teaching Assistant Professor at NC State’s ISE Department, specializing in supply chain economics, engineering design processes, and fostering student innovation through advanced modeling techniques.
Faculty Advisor:
Dr. Nur Ozaltin
TAKE ME TO APM’S WEBSITE
American Production and Inventory Control Society (APICS)
The APICS Triangle Chapter is a non-profit professional supply chain organization dedicated to growing the strength of the local supply chain community by enriching its members’ knowledge and skills through:
Certification review courses
Networking opportunities
Tours
Seminars
Professional development meetings
Show me APICS’s website
Industrial and Systems Engineering Graduate Student Association (ISE GSA)
ISE GSA represents the graduate student body of the Edward P. Fitts Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering and serves as an intermediary between the department and its graduate students for any and all concerns. Their mission includes:
To represent the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering graduate student body.
To give the graduate students an open forum to discuss concerns they have with the department.
To disseminate information of interest or importance to its member students.
To promote and foster unity within the graduate students through seminars, social gatherings, and other activities.
The membership of the ISE GSA consists of all graduate students enrolled in the Industrial and Systems Engineering department at NC State University.
Faculty Advisor: TBD
I want to explore more about ISE GSA
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS)
INFORMS is the world’s largest organization for advanced analytics professionals. It focuses on providing data analytics and operations research information, training and best practices for its members and industry at large.
NC State’s Student Chapter of INFORMS is for graduate and undergraduate students. If your interests lie in the operations research and management science fields, INFORMS is for you.
Faculty Advisor: TBD
I want to
CHECK OUT NC STATE INFORMS’ FACEBOOK
I WANT TO see NC STATE INFORMS’
Instagram
I WANT TO Follow NC STATE INFORMS’
LinkedIn
Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE)
IISE is the world’s largest professional society dedicated to supporting the industrial engineering profession. It is perfect for individuals involved with improving quality and productivity.
The NC State IISE student chapter connects you to industrial engineering beyond NC State. As a member of our chapter, you will have the opportunity to:
Make valuable professional connections
Attend academic conferences
Sit in on company presentations
Land an internship or job!
Faculty Advisor:
Dr. Kanton Reynolds
I want to go to NC State IISE’s website
I want to check out NC State IISE’s Facebook
SME
SME has served the manufacturing industry for more than 80 years. They promote advanced manufacturing technology and develop a skilled workforce. They work with manufacturers to share knowledge and resources to solve industry demands.
NC State’s SME student chapter gives you the opportunity to:
Take manufacturing plant tours
Network with upperclassmen and professors
Build lifelong friendships
And, it looks great on your resume!
Faculty Advisor:
Dr. Jingyan Dong
Show me SME’s website
Society for Health Systems (SHS)
The purpose of the Society for Health Systems (SHS) is to promote the use and awareness of systems engineering, analysis, and process improvement in the healthcare field by providing appropriate education and career opportunities to NC State students. This organization is a committee that operates under IISE but focuses specifically on Health Systems Engineering. See
parent organization
.
Faculty Advisor:
Dr. Corey Kiassat
I want to explore SHS’S website
Other Engineering Student Organizations
Show me more about Engineers Without Borders (EWB)
I want to learn more about the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE)
I want to discover more about the Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers (SASE)
I want to know more about The Society of Women Engineers (SWE)
I want to learn more about the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE)