Student Organizations
In addition to the broad range of cultural and recreational activities available at the university, students have many opportunities for professional growth. Student organizations undertake projects to further student exposure to the profession. Many organizations invite guest speakers from industry and government. Students who accumulate outstanding academic records may be considered for membership in the honorary societies.
Have a look at our department-affiliated organizations and honoraries below, or check out the college’s full list of
Engineering Student Organizations
Air and Waste Management Association (AWMA)
NCSU’s student chapter of the Air and Waste Management Association (AWMA) is open to all students at NCSU who have an interest in environmental science and engineering, specifically pertaining to problems of air, water, solid waste, groundwater, and soils, including both technical and policy aspects. See
Alpha Omega Epsilon Engineering Sorority (ΑΩΕ)
Alpha Omega Epsilon is a professional and social sorority composed of female engineering students and alumnae. The sorority was founded on November 13, 1983, at Marquette University. The Gamma Chapter of Alpha Omega Epsilon upholds the goals of its parent organization to further the advancement of female engineers, specifically those women studying engineering at NCSU. See
American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
The NCSU chapter of the American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) actively promotes Native American students in the fields of engineering and science. Its mission is to substantially increase the representation of American Indian and Alaskan Natives in engineering, science and other related technology disciplines. See
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
The American Institute of Civil Engineers (ASCE) is the primary professional society in the U.S. in civil engineering and the world’s largest engineering society. The NCSU ASCE student organization helps students master the civil engineering skills they need to enter the profession, develop leadership skills, connect to a network of professionals, and participate in creative activities and competitions. See
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE)
The NCSU student chapter of the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) was founded on April 19, 1948, in the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. Students are encouraged to participate in the national ASHRAE design competition and take co-ops and internships with HVAC firms. See
American Water Resources Association (AWRA)
The American Water Resources Association (AWRA) is a scientific and educational non-profit organization. AWRA was established to encourage and foster interdisciplinary communication among persons of diverse backgrounds working on any aspect of water resources disciplines. See
and
Associated General Contractors (AGC)
The Associated General Contractors (AGC) of America is the leading national professional organization representing both public and private commercial construction. To prepare the industry for the future, AGC is dedicated to promoting the construction industry at institutes of higher education through research, conferences, and scholarships. The NCSU student chapter was chartered on April 28, 1930, as AGC’s first student chapter. See
Chi Epsilon (XE)
Chi Epsilon is the National Civil Engineering Honor Society. Chi Epsilon was organized to recognize the characteristics of the individual civil engineer deemed to be fundamental to the successful pursuit of an engineering career and to aid in the development of those characteristics in civil engineering students. It is focused on the personal qualities: Scholarship, Character, Practicality, and Sociability. See
Civil Engineering Graduate Student Association (CEGSA)
The purpose of the CEGSA is to represent the graduate students in the Department of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering. Its purpose shall include, but not be limited to, the development of projects, undertakings, studies, panels, and other activities and programs in cooperation and coordination with the department, NC State University student association, and other organizations.
Coasts, Oceans, Ports and Rivers Institute (COPRI)
The COPRI student chapter at NC State serves as a platform to bring together graduate students interested in coastal and ocean engineering and related fields, and to facilitate their academic and professional development. COPRI at NC State organizes academic and social events to promote awareness of the state of the art in sustainable development practices for our coasts, oceans, ports, waterways, rivers, and wetlands. See
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI)
The objective of EERI‐NCSU is to promote the study and practice of earthquake engineering in the university and the community, to strive to solve national earthquake engineering problems to protect people and property from the effects of earthquakes, to further the professional development of the students, and to improve inter‐disciplinary communication. See
Engineering Ambassadors (EA)
The goal of the Engineering Ambassadors organization is high-quality service throughout the College of Engineering, the development of leadership skills, as well as personal and professional growth. Engineering Ambassadors are involved with activities related to recruiting, student retention, and promotion of the goals of the First Year Engineering Program and the College of Engineering.
Engineering Entrepreneurs Program (EEP)
The Engineering Entrepreneurs Program (EEP) is the hub of the technology entrepreneurship ecosystem at NC State University. At its core, the EEP provides a transformational entrepreneurship education experience for students through its fully immersive, multi-disciplinary, simulation-like learning environment. The EEP seeks to inspire, empower, and challenge its students to change the world and radically improve the human condition.
Engineers Without Borders (EWB)
The NCSU chapter of Engineers Without Borders (EWB) is dedicated to improving lives through the creation and implementation of sustainable projects to address the needs of disadvantaged people. EWB-NCSU also works to help the local community through service. See
Engineers’ Council (EC)
Established in 1987, the Engineers’ Council, or “E-Council,” is the representative assembly for the engineering undergraduate student body at NC State University. It addresses the concerns of undergraduate engineering students and is responsible for the appropriation of funds to engineering student organizations. It also sponsors such events as the Engineering Career Fair and Engineers Week.
Geo-Institute Graduate Student Organization at the North Carolina State University (G-I GSO)
The mission of the Student Organization of the Geo-Institute is to be a student-led body that functions to enhance the educational and personal experience of students in the geo-engineering community at North Carolina State University. See
and
ASCE Geo-Institute
Institute of Transportation Engineers, American Society of Highway Engineers, and American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (ITE/ASHE/AREMA)
Institute of Transportation Engineers, American Society of Highway Engineers, and American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (ITE/ASHE/AREMA) was created to help develop the potential of young transportation professionals and show how transportation engineers function in the real world. There are monthly meetings of the student chapter to expose students to a variety of topics in the transportation field. Students also have many opportunities to connect through social and volunteer events throughout the year. See
National Association of Home Builders (NAHB)
The NCSU chapter of the National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) was started in 1992. NAHB is a trade association that helps promote the policies that make housing a national priority. Since 1942, NAHB has been serving its members, the housing industry, and the public at large. See
National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE)
The NCSU Region 2 student chapter of the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) is dedicated to fulfilling its mission of increasing the number of black engineers who excel academically, succeed professionally, and positively impact the community. NSBE has a long tradition of programs geared toward the successful recruitment, retention, and graduation of black engineers. See
Open Hardware Makerspace (OHM)
Open Hardware Makerspace is creating a community and environment at NCSU to foster the development and innovation of technical hobbyists with various interests, from basic woodworking to advanced robotics. We aim to be inclusive of all technical interests and provide the knowledge and the tools necessary to pursue them, both on campus and through outreach to the surrounding community. By empowering technological experimentation, we will be a birthplace of new ideas.
Professional Engineers of North Carolina (PENC)
North Carolina State University reactivated its student chapter of Professional Engineers of North Carolina (PENC) in 2009. The chapter focuses on 1.) educating students about their career future and preparing them for interviews and communications with prospective employers, and 2.) promoting
licensure
. PENC at NCSU is open to all engineering students across campus. See
Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers (SASE)
The Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers at North Carolina State University (SASE at NCSU) provides Asian students at NC State with opportunities to grow and connect with their community and culture while also expanding their professional networks. SASE was founded in 2007 to help Asian-heritage scientific and engineering professionals achieve their full potential. See
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE)
The mission of the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) is to promote the development of Hispanics in engineering, science, and other technical professions to achieve educational excellence, economic opportunity, and social equality. See
Student Energy Club
The Student Energy Club focuses on creating a platform of interdisciplinary experts to educate the NC State community on the critical challenges the energy system faces today and the emerging technologies that are being used to mitigate them. The cooperative team provides a wide array of opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to get involved in cutting-edge research in energy technologies and policy.
Tau Beta Pi (ΤΒΦ)
Tau Beta Pi is the only engineering honor society representing the entire engineering profession. It is the nation’s second-oldest honor society, founded at Lehigh University in 1885, to offer engineering students a chance to be in an honorary society like Phi Beta Kappa, which did not accept technical students. Our Alpha chapter in North Carolina was founded on October 10, 1925. See
Theta Tau Professional Engineering Fraternity (ΘΤ)
Theta Tau is the oldest and largest professional engineering fraternity in the United States, with a diverse membership of men and women studying engineering. The fraternity promotes the social and professional development of its members both during and after college. The NCSU Rho chapter of Theta Tau was founded in 1924, the same year the engineering department became a college. See
Women’s Transportation Seminar at NC State (WTS)
The WTS student organization promotes the advancement of women in the transportation industry. The organization provides opportunities for networking and careers after college through supplemental education on transportation-related work, training in leadership and professional development, and a mentoring program with WTS professionals. The student organization commonly partners with the WTS NC Triangle Chapter and works to promote the mission of WTS International. See
Engineering Student Organizations