Student Organizations
In addition to a broad range of cultural and recreational activities available at the university, students have many opportunities for professional growth and development. Student organizations undertake projects to further student exposure to a profession. Many organizations invite guest speakers from industry and government. Students who accumulate outstanding academic records may be considered for membership in the honorary societies.
American Society of Biological and Agricultural Engineers
ASABE is the primary professional society for biological and agricultural engineers worldwide. The NC State ASABE student organization helps students master the engineering skills they need to enter the profession, develop leadership skills, connect to a network of professionals, and participate in creative activities and
competitions.
Pack Pullers
The Pack Pullers are a student organization in the Biological and Agricultural Engineering Department. Each year, students design and fabricate a quarter-scale tractor to compete at the ASABE International 1/4 Scale Tractor Student Design Competition in Peoria, Illinois. In 2024, the team won first place
overall.
RoboPack
RoboPack is a competition team that participates in the annual Student Design Robotics Competition hosted by the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers. For the competition, the teams build an autonomous robot that performs an agricultural
task.
BAE Graduate Student Association
The purpose of the BAE Graduate Student Association is to represent the graduate student body within the Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering and across NC State, while promoting professional interest and fellowship among BAE graduate
students.
Alpha Epsilon
Alpha Epsilon is the honor society for outstanding agricultural, biological and food engineers. The objectives of the honor society are to promote the high ideals of the engineering profession, to give recognition to those agricultural, biological and food engineers who manifest worthy qualities of character, scholarship and professional attainment, and to encourage and support such improvements in the agricultural, biological and food engineering profession that make it an instrument of greater service to mankind. The North Carolina chapter was established in 1967 as the Mu
Chapter.