Student Organizations – Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Why? The traditional (and still important) reason is that it looks good on your resume. But there are other
better
reasons. Becoming involved in any of these organizations allows you to meet and develop relationships with fellow students, staff, and faculty while becoming acquainted with potential career paths in mechanical or aerospace engineering. Take a look at the organizations listed below and try one on for size. Or, check out all engineering organizations at
Aerial Robotics Club (ARC
The NCSU Aerial Robotics Club (ARC) was formed in October 2000 to participate in flying robotics competitions. ARC’s aim is to create an outlet for engineering students to challenge themselves in completing missions the world deems currently impossible, specifically, to create a fleet of autonomous vehicles for research and for competitions. See
Alpha Omega Epsilon Engineering Sorority (ΑΩΕ)
Alpha Omega Epsilon is a professional and social sorority composed of female engineering students and alumnae. The sorority was founded on November 13, 1983, at Marquette University. The Gamma Chapter of Alpha Omega Epsilon upholds the goals of its parent organization to further the advancement of female engineers, specifically those women studying engineering at NCSU. See
American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
The NCSU chapter of the American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) actively promotes Native American students in the fields of engineering and science. Its mission is to substantially increase the representation of American Indian and Alaskan Natives in engineering, science and other related technology disciplines. See
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) is the world’s largest technical society devoted to the global aerospace community. The NCSU student branch is focused on making a positive statement about the future of aerospace technologies while enhancing education, embracing competition, and cooperating with other organizations. See
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE)
The NCSU student chapter of the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) was founded on April 19, 1948, in the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. Students are encouraged to participate in the national ASHRAE design competition and take co-ops and internships with HVAC firms. See
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
Founded in 1880 as the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), today’s ASME promotes the art, science and practice of mechanical and multidisciplinary engineering and allied sciences around the globe. Our student section of ASME has been a very active student organization, with activities that focus on leadership, community and education. See
AquaPack Robotics
AquaPack Robotics provides students with an exciting opportunity to apply classroom skills to a challenging design project: building an autonomous underwater vehicle. Although we are primarily affiliated with the Electrical and Computer Engineering department, our team includes students from various engineering and science disciplines.
AquaPack Robotics Website.
Drone Racing Club
The Drone Racing Club at NCSU is intended to enrich people’s understanding of drones and their applications by giving members the opportunity to build a drone and race it in nationwide competitions. By introducing people to the world of drones through drone racing, we hope that we can spark their interest in other drone applications. We encourage the use of this technology and are open to participation from all in the community who have interest.
Engineering Ambassadors (EA)
The goal of the Engineering Ambassadors organization is high-quality service throughout the College of Engineering, the development of leadership skills, as well as personal and professional growth. Engineering Ambassadors are involved with activities related to recruiting, student retention, and promotion of the goals of the First Year Engineering Program and the College of Engineering.
Engineering Entrepreneurs Program (EEP)
The Engineering Entrepreneurs Program (EEP) is the hub of the technology entrepreneurship ecosystem at NC State University. At its core, the EEP provides a transformational entrepreneurship education experience for students through its fully-immersive, multi-disciplinary, simulation-like learning environment. The EEP seeks to inspire, to empower, and to challenge its students to change the world and radically improve the human condition.
Engineers’ Council (EC)
Established in 1987, the Engineers’ Council, or “E-Council,” is the representative assembly for the engineering undergraduate student body at NC State University. It addresses the concerns of undergraduate engineering students and is responsible for the appropriation of funds to engineering student organizations. It also sponsors such events as
Engineering Career Fair
and
Engineers Week
Engineers Without Borders (EWB)
The NCSU chapter of Engineers Without Borders (EWB) is dedicated to improving lives through the creation and implementation of sustainable projects to address the needs of disadvantaged peoples. EWB-NCSU also works to help the local community through service. See
High Power Rocketry Club (HPRC)
Students in the High Power Rocketry Club (HPRC) learn about rocket design, construction, and safety through first-hand experience. The HPRC designs and builds a rocket yearly for the NASA Undergraduate Student Launch Initiative (USLI) competition. Students also engage in outreach opportunities to educate elementary school students about the basics of rocketry, instilling in them a passion for rocketry that will carry into the future. See
MAE Motorsports (BAJA and Formula)
MAE Motorsports is a student organization that designs, builds, and competes its race cars in annual collegiate competitions sponsored by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). Our program is housed in the College of Engineering, but any member of the student body, graduate or undergraduate, can be a member.
BAJA Team
Formula Team
. See also
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Graduate Student Association (MAEGSA)
The MAE GSA represents the graduate student body in the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, as well as in the
University GSA
. It provides a forum for graduate student opinions in all matters of mutual interest to faculty and graduate students and promotes professional interest and fellowship among current graduate students and MAE alumni.
Minority Engineering Graduate Student Association
The Minority Engineering Graduate Student Association is committed to bringing together minority engineering graduate students from all engineering disciplines to provide support, community, and guidance at NC State.
National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE)
The NCSU Region 2 student chapter of the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) is dedicated to fulfilling its mission of increasing the number of black engineers who excel academically, succeed professionally, and positively impact the community. NSBE has a long tradition of programs geared toward the successful recruitment, retention, and graduation of black engineers. See
Pi Tau Sigma Mechanical Engineering Honor Society (ΠΤΣ)
Pi Tau Sigma is the mechanical engineering honor society at NCSU. Its purpose is to foster the high ideals of the engineering profession, to promote the mutual professional welfare of its members, and to develop in students of mechanical engineering the attributes necessary for effective leadership and the assumption of the responsibilities of a citizen in a democracy. See
Professional Engineers of North Carolina (PENC)
North Carolina State University reactivated its student chapter of Professional Engineers of North Carolina (PENC) in 2009. The chapter focuses on 1) educating students about their career future and preparing them for interviews and communications with prospective employers, and 2) promoting
licensure
. PENC at NCSU is open to all engineering students across campus. See
Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers at NC State (SASE at NCSU)
The Society of Asian Scientists and Engineers (SASE) was founded in November 2007 to help Asian heritage scientific and engineering professionals achieve their full potential. SASE’s mission is to prepare Asian heritage scientists and engineers for success in the global business world, celebrate diversity on campuses and in the workplace, and provide opportunities for members to make contributions to their local communities. Through SASE at NC State University we hope to enable and provide the students at NC State opportunities to grow and connect with their community and culture while also expanding their professional networks.
Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE)
The mission of the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) is to promote the development of Hispanics in engineering, science, and other technical professions to achieve educational excellence, economic opportunity, and social equality. See
Society of Manufacturing Engineers (SME)
The Society of Manufacturing Engineers is the world’s leading professional society advancing manufacturing knowledge and influencing more than half a million manufacturing practitioners annually. The student chapter is a one-stop shop for busy students, offering everything from hard-to-find technical information on state-of-the-art manufacturing processes and applications to providing unparalleled networking opportunities to help students launch careers in manufacturing. See
Society of Women Engineers (SWE)
The Society of Women Engineers (SWE), founded in 1950, is a not-for-profit educational and service organization. SWE is the driving force that establishes engineering as a highly desirable career aspiration for women. NCSU SWE sponsors programs focused on women’s issues in engineering and works to encourage K-12 girls to have an interest in engineering and science. See
Solar Car Team (SolarPack)
Team of students working to build and race a solar car to be used for energy efficient vehicle competitions. The vehicle will be designed with US automotive design laws in mind and result in a street legal solar vehicle to be marketed and commercialized.
Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS)
The Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS) Chapter at NCSU (formerly Commercial Space Club) promotes the exploration and development of space and inspires students through our involvement in space-related projects. The club performs high-altitude balloon launches, teaches students programming skills, connects students with industry professionals, and more. See
Tau Beta Pi (ΤΒΠ)
Tau Beta Pi is the only engineering honor society representing the entire engineering profession. It is the nation’s second-oldest honor society, founded at Lehigh University in 1885, to offer engineering students a chance to be in an honorary society like Phi Beta Kappa, which did not accept technical students. Our Alpha chapter of North Carolina was founded on October 10, 1925. See
Theme Park Club
About
This club focuses on providing learning opportunities through meetings with industry professionals, learning about the industry on trips to events and parks, connecting students with career and internship opportunities, and participating in relevant projects and competitions. Here you will have the opportunity to meet with everyone from Disney Imagineers and Universal engineers and maintain professional connections. We also love to engage socially and provide a supportive community of students with similar interests. Please join us in our magical adventures!
Theta Tau Professional Engineering Fraternity (ΘΤ)
Theta Tau is the oldest and largest professional engineering fraternity in the United States, with a diverse membership of men and women studying engineering. The fraternity promotes the social and professional development of its members both during and after college. The NCSU Rho chapter of Theta Tau was founded in 1924, the same year the engineering department became a college. See
Wolfpack Formula Hybrid (Pack Hybrid)
Wolfpack Formula Hybrid is a student organization that designs and fabricates a hybrid racecar to compete annually in the Formula Hybrid SAE competition. We are an interdisciplinary organization open to students of all majors including but not limited to: Mechanical, Aerospace, Electrical, Computer Science, Business, and Design.
Women in Mechanical and Aerospace (WIMA)
The purpose of Women in Mechanical and Aerospace (WIMA) is to provide members with a practical and updated look at industry, academic support, information on research, extra-curricular activities, and relationships with professors, as well as professional development and outreach opportunities, and to encourage and enable female students to succeed in mechanical and aerospace engineering. See